# The Next Chapter In The SDLC Tool Chain Evolution

To understand Jenkins X better, we'll start by exploring the (recent) history of building and deploying software. For the sake of brevity, we will not go all the way back to writing software on punch cards. Instead, we'll start at the advent of Jenkins that rose to prominence in the late 00s as Hudson, the build server of choice within the Java community.

Hudson solved a growing need for a reliable, consistent, and programmable way of building and testing software. In many organizations, it formed the heart of an emerging system, the Software Development Lifecycle processes, and toolchain that accompany them.

As software started eating the world, companies began to rely on this toolchain for more and more of their core business success. As the reliance grew, so did the dependence on this toolchain to provide more information than "green build" or "red build". To accommodate this need for more information, the number of tools in the toolchain grew. Test tools, static code analysis, security testing, and lint tools are only a few of the types that emerged.

Once we understood that the quality of code can be measured and that we can design gates that will prevent us from moving further in case of a bug or a failure, we turned our attention to deployment. The more the preceding steps were automated, the more our focus shifted to deployment. As a result, many organizations moved from continuous integration (CI) that deals mostly with building and partial testing to continuous delivery (CD) that adds the latter parts of the software development lifecycle. As a result, continuous delivery tries to define and automate the whole lifecycle of an application, from a commit to a code repository, all the way until a new release is deployed to production. 

It is here we started running into a challenge. Going further along the chain from commit to production, we wanted to automate the boring and repetitive steps away from humans. People should not be used as automatons, dealing with hand-offs and moving data from one source to another. However, most tasks - that used to require hand-offs - are dealt with by different tools. So we faced the challenge imposed by need of every tool in the chain to be able to participate in an automated fashion.

With the increase in adoption of CI/CD, the race for "delivering more software faster" started. Soon it became obvious that the key is in collaboration. As a result, tools that facilitate communication have sprouted like mushrooms. They ranged from ticket and project management systems all the way to brand new Kanban issue trackers. However, significant hurdles had to be overcame for these trackers to provide insight into which issue was related to what changes. In most cases, that is still very much dependant on hygiene and discipline, which is often in short supply when under time pressure. 

The way information (direct or through audits) flows through the system must not rely on humans adding *more* information than necessary for the process at hand. Otherwise, we'd need for tools to have context awareness - e.g. access to the data of the current process execution.

Another side effect of increased number of people that are using the tools in the SDLC toolchain comes in the form of the stress on the tools. With close collaboration and short cycles becoming the norm via Agile, Scrum, Kanban and the like, both the number of people and the interactions increased. With that, the need increased for tools to scale both vertically and horizontally. Needless to say, not every tool survived the transition well. 

These new usage patterns and methodologies - such as Agile - did not come out of nowhere. They were a response to the messages "software is eating the world" and "every company is a software company" reverberating throughout the world. This led to a mass movement to "digitally transform" any and all organizations with new methodologies and accompanying tools. That, in turn, created several changes for IT, including the move from a siloed corner of the organization to a strategic asset permeating through all departments. 

Once, there was strong segregation between software being developed and software running in production. Continuous Delivery changed that. We realized that humans should not interact with production outside very limited and usually unexpected situations. An automated chain of tools - under the command of humans - should do all the work.

Those situations put those tools firmly within the scope of the Information Security Office departments (often called CISO) which, in turn, started challenging their security profiles. Using _admin_ as both username and password didn't cut it anymore, neither did the process of manually changing production systems.

TODO: Continue review

Because any tool required to make changes in production is relied upon for any kind of change, it is imperative it is always available. This is especially true in the case of an emergency, where previously one might create a patch directly in production. Since the current system no longer allows this, the entire chain from commit to production has to be followed. This means that those tools cannot go down, and they require the same process for changes as production changes and all the other implications. 

Another part of what it means to be _production_, are the requirements on how to install and manage the tools. Managing the tools individually, each in their own way is a sure way to drive people mad. It is better to find a way where each tool can be installed and managed in a similar fashion. When managing the tools, every change must be auditable and everything should be able to be generated from source. Speaking of sources, many organizations hold golden sources for key information. This means that tools should not have this information themselves but rely on external systems for this. One such example is authorization and authentication. This should be managed via a Single Sign-On (SSO) solution, and not by each tool individually.

Having a process in place and a chain of tools that allows you to automate that is great. But the question then becomes, how do you automate the process? The demand is for leveraging the tools to create a repeatable, auditable workflow. Preferably, this workflow is overarching, a blueprint for the entire flow rather than snippets of code scattered across the toolchain. And with the amount of software created in most organizations, there is going to be substantial overlap in workflow definitions. So in the interest of efficiency, organizations will demand reusable workflow definitions or workflow libraries at the very least.

Once the first workflows are running, an all too familiar challenge comes back. If the workflow is supposed to cover all the tools in the chain, people writing the workflows will need to understand each tool. This will border on insanity and is a recipe to create new silos in your organization. This is where one should rely on something that glues the different tools together. That (preferably) supports all the best of breed products already and doesn't force you to understand each tool in detail.

Many of the challenges described were insurmountable in the past for organizations except for the likes of Google, Microsoft, Facebook, and the like. But the democratization of software services through Open-Source and Public Initiatives have brought these within the reach of most organizations. Yet, why waste time and resources on building it yourself, if you can consume it directly? Many organizations have struggled with building the same kind of SDLC toolchain and ended up reinventing the wheel. The time is ripe for the light at the end of the tunnel, for suites of SDLC toolchains to bring you all the power the tech giants have had, without having to build it yourself. As you're reading a book about Jenkins X, I'll put the claim here: Jenkins X is an answer to many of the challenges described in this chapter. Not by doing it all by itself, but by leveraging a set of tools that are fit for purpose and gluing them together in a fashion most organizations can only dream of.