## TODO

- [X] Code
- [X] Write
- [-] Code review static GKE
- [ ] Code review serverless GKE
- [-] Code review static EKS
- [-] Code review serverless EKS
- [-] Code review static AKS
- [-] Code review serverless AKS
- [-] Code review existing static cluster
- [-] Code review existing serverless cluster
- [X] Text review
- [X] Gist
- [X] Review titles
- [ ] Proofread
- [ ] Diagrams
- [ ] Add to slides
- [ ] Publish on TechnologyConversations.com
- [ ] Add to Book.txt
- [ ] Publish on LeanPub.com 

# Adding Colors To Our Lives

You probably guessed by now that I am not a big fan of using UIs for anything but read-only operations. To be more precise, I believe that UIs are useful visualizations, and not many other things related to the systems we're operating. I'd even go as far as to say that UIs are one of the main reasons why so many companies are so far behind. People tend to rely on UIs so much that they never learn how to automate processes, how to use Git properly, how to write scripts, etc.

Nevertheless, using UIs to visualize stuff is useful, and it might be handy to have an ability to visualize Jenkins X pipelines and its other processes as well.

In the [Managing Third-Party Applications](#apps) chapter, I told you that "the 'real' Apps are yet to come" and that, at the time I wrote it (October 2019), *"the most anticipated one is Jenkins X UI". After a long wait, the UI is finally available (since November 2019), and we can take a look at it. Those of you who prefer looking at "pretty colors" can finally marvel at yet another web interface.

This will probably be the shortest chapter I wrote (at least in this book) since there is not much to do but install the UI and explore it. But, before we do that, please note a few warnings.

W> Jenkins X UI currently works only inside CloudBees Jenkins X Distribution (CJXD). That might change in the future but, for now, the UI is reserved exclusively for CJXD. Assuming that the CJXD requirements match your needs, there shouldn't be a reason not to use it. It is free, it is stable, and it is a validated version of open source Jenkins X. If, on the other hand, you cannot or you do not want to use CJXD, you will likely have to be patient. The CJXD is working on extending it to other Kubernetes flavors, so the wait will hopefully not be a long one.

W> Jenkins X UI requires Vault as the secrets management. As long as Vault is supported in your Kubernetes flavor, it is a much better option than storing secrets locally, so you should be using it anyway.

Jenkins X UI is a graphical interface that supports a subset of the features available through command line. Apart from that and the warnings, there's not much more I can say about it. So, let's create a cluster (unless you kept running the one from before) and install the UI.

## Creating A Kubernetes Cluster With CloudBees Jenkins X Distribution

I> All the commands from this chapter are available in the [20-ui.sh](https://gist.github.com/95fb4ff85cbc1327a2dbad4bd13c7fb7) Gist.

The Gists that you might use to create a cluster and install Jenkins X are as follows.

* Create a new **GKE** cluster with **serverless** Jenkins X created **with the Boot**: [gke-jx-boot.sh](https://gist.github.com/1eff2069aa68c4aee29c35b94dd9467f)

Now that we have a Kubernetes cluster with Jenkins X up-and-running, we can turn our attention to the UI.

## Installing Jenkins X UI

Jenkins X UI is provided as a Jenkins X App. All we have to do is to `add` it.

```bash
jx add app jx-app-ui
```

We can see from the output that the process created a pull request. That should come as no surprise since we alredy observed that same behavior of adding Apps before. So, let's skip straight into the pull request.

Please open the PR link from the output. Feel free to inspect the proposed changes by clicking the *Files changed* tab. You'll see that there is nothing special about it, at least not when compared with any other Jenkins X App. We got a new directory `env/jx-app-ui`, and inside it are the already-familiar files `templates/app.yaml` (defines the App) and `values.yaml` (Helm values). The App was added as yet another entry in `env/requirements.yaml` where all the other dependencies of the `dev` environment are defined.

If that was not the first time you added an App, the operation was unexciting. That's how it should be. Boring is good, because it means that your're familiar with it and that nothing unexpected happened.

The only action we need to do is to approve the pull request. Assuming that you're happy with the suggested changes, please make sure that you are in the *Conversation* tab, and click *Merge pull request*, followed with the *Confirm merge* button.

That's it. The UI is up-and-running inside the Cluster. To be more precise, it is likelly not yet running, but it will be once the activity of the `dev` pipeline is finished. To put your doubts at ease, we'll output the activities and confirm that the one triggered by the merge has indeed finished.

 ```bash
jx get activities \
    --filter environment-$CLUSTER_NAME-dev/master \
    --watch
```

Please press *ctrl+c* to stop watching the activities once you confirm that the `master` branch was built.

All that's left is to open the UI in your favorite browser.

```bash
UI_ADDR=$(kubectl get ing jxui \
    --output jsonpath="{.spec.rules[0].host}")

open "http://$UI_ADDR"
```

We retrieved the address of the Ingress resource associated with the UI, and opened it in a browser.

There's not much more I can say. It would be pointless for me to guide you through the UI. It is a graphical representation of some of the outputs `jx` produces. Given that you already know most of `jx` CLI, you should have no problem figuring out what is what in the UI.

I> If you're reading this in 2019, you'll notice that not many things are available in the UI. That's because it was released in November 2019 and you are looking at one of the first versions of it. On the other hand, if you are reading this sometime in 2020, I have no idea what you're seeing. The UI must have changed a lot. In any case, I'll leave you exploring it alone.

## What Now?

This is my favorite part since I love destroying things.

You can delete the cluster and take a break, or you can jump right into the next chapter if there is any.

We'll delete all the repositories used in this chapter, except for `dev` that can be reused.

```bash
GH_USER=[...]

hub delete -y \
    $GH_USER/environment-$CLUSTER_NAME-staging

hub delete -y \
    $GH_USER/environment-$CLUSTER_NAME-production
```

Finally, delete the cluster. You can find the instructions at the end of the Gist you used at the beginning of the chapter. They are near the bottom.